---
layout: post
title: Day 1, Parts 1 & 2
---

Solving Advent of Code Day 1

# Preparation:

Going in, I felt very prepared to solve this day. We learned a lot about list manipulations and different operations we can use, so I felt confident because of my understanding of the topic. I didn't anticipate many setbacks for this day.

# Debrief:

My code for Day 1 can be accessed [here](https://github.com/maxzw2/maxzw2.github.io/blob/f77591babbaeff2d4a77699b432792adcf0aa01a/files/Day_1_Advent_of_Code_2024.ipynb)

Solving part 1 was quite simple, a replication of my outline. I felt that my code was grounded and simple, which made me feel more comfortable with the problems. I used entirely just knowledge from Programming Fundamentals on making and sorting lists. Today's problem was just comparing two lists of integer values I needed to create and format based on the input. For part 1, I sorted my lists from smallest to greatest, and used enumerate() and abs() to calculate the total difference between the two lists, in index order.

Part 2 was almost a very similar application to part 1, instead finding the frequency of numbers in one list for the other list and doing arithmetic on those values. Because I had already gone through part 1, solving part 2 was quite simple, and I just converted my code to count the number of repeats by simply using count(). After solving Day 1, I feel a little more confident in solving the rest of the days after seeing my outline work out well.

I didn't face many challenges in solving Day 1. Onward to Day 2!
