---
layout: post
title: Day 2, Parts 1 & 2
---
Solving Advent of Code Day 2

# Preparation:

I felt confident about my ability to solve Day 2's problems, which seemed like a simple-ish integer difference problem. I was very comfortable with this, doing it various times as coursework and practicing it in other problems. My goal was to finish these problems swiftly and elegantly.

# Debrief:

View my code for Day 2 [here](https://github.com/maxzw2/maxzw2.github.io/blob/89325707dd1b717bbb672f49d3ff1a77e0be9118/files/Day_2_Advent_of_Code_2024.ipynb)

Solving Day 2 was a doozy. It took me multiple days of trying to figure out what was going on with my code for Part 2 -- figuring out which cases I was overcompensating for and which ones I was excluding when I made changes. 

The problem input is a bunch of numbers spaced apart on multiple lines. Our goal in Part 1 is to find the number of lines/lists of integers where their differences between each adjacent number is either all positive or all negative and each difference should be less than or equal to 3/-3 but greater than 1/-1. For part 2, there can now be one "outlier" integer in a valid line of integers that deviates from the regulation (for example, "1 2 3 -10 4 5" would be valid, but so would less obvious cases like "1 2 1 3"). 

I feel good about my solution to Part 1. I used the properties of sets to narrow down the complexity of my calculations, which made me feel confident with applying course knowledge to these problems. My code focuses on finding all of the differences in each list of integers, converting the differences to sets (since valid lines only have either {1, 2, 3} or {-1, -2, -3}, or a subset of either). 

My approach followed my bite-sized steps of making lists, finding differences, and then checking their validity. I had initially wanted to use the all() function since I had found it in Python's documentation when looking for ways to apply my condition. However, after sitting with the problem, I realized that sets provide a much sleeker solution that is enough for the scope of the problem -- I don't need to create unnecessary for loops iterating through my differences.

However, I faced multiple setbacks in implementing Part 2. I had a general understanding of how to approach this problem -- go through cases with out-of-bound differences and comb through them. However, my brute-force-like solution just tested removing one difference at a time and then checking validity. This ignored the case where removing one difference makes the differences  valid in my code, but not actually when recalculated without the removed integer. I didn't recalculate my difference, as I didn't realize this error at first. 

For example, the list "1 2 0 1" is invalid for Part 2, as removing 0 still yields incorrect lists. However, their differences are technically valid without recalculating -- (1, -2, 1) is the original difference. Testing by removing (-2) yields a valid difference list. This was my first error, which plagued the rest of my attempts. My logic glossed over the translation loss between the integer list and the difference. I did not figure out this blunder until I had already switched gears. 

I initially assumed that, after some brief testing, differences hold the same properties as taking out integers, so I lazily continued to try and make it work despite missing different scenarios. My mistake was trying to form a direct extension of Part 1 when in reality, they should be treated as two separate problems. My mindset was too rigid to try looking at the problem from a more complicated view that was needed.

At this point, I was feeling quite frustrated and tired of the problem -- I had felt that I could have been missing dozens more test cases. But, when I made the jump to remove integers from the list at the root of the problem, I ended up with the correct number of valid cases after playing around with it. I have a brute-force solution, which I think is appropriate since the data is so small that it doesn't take even a few seconds longer. Through a for loop, I create a copy of my list of integers, remove the indexed character (I iterate through the indexes of the list), and test for validity after calculating differences. Previously, my code was just an else statement after I found all the valid Part 1 cases, where I iterated through my differences instead.

Overall, I feel a little less moralized after this situation, but I know now the sort of challenges I will face in the future problems with misunderstanding test cases.

## Next Steps:

After diving into my code for Part 2, I am starting to fall under an impossible time crunch to finish the other problems -- I will likely cut myself off after solving Day 3's problem, unfortunately. But, it's time to learn about regular expressions for Day 3!
