---
layout: post
title: Outlining Advent of Code, Days 1-5
---

The first step to getting started -- an outline!

Preparation:

Going in, I expected some challenges with the topics and problems that I wouldn't immediately know the first steps to solve. After taking in the scope that I might need with many of these problems, I felt nervous about the knowledge needed to solve the problems. I knew from past tries that it would be very easy to get lost, especially with the relatively large input sizes. But, I still felt confident in being able to find solutions.

Debrief:

After reading through and understanding the problems, I am probably more nervous about the amount of time needed! But, I found some useful information to solve each problem in Python's documentation. I am pretty confident in solving Days 1-3 as I think are more tame in complexity. For Day 3, when looking for a way to find patterns in Python, I found re module (regular expressions), and I learned a lot about its syntax and properties -- I included what I think should be the pattern I look for in my outline. This made me feel a lot more confident in getting that problem done.

On the other hand, Day 4 seems like a big jump in complexity. I've solved problems like this one before, like rule checks for Tic-Tac-Toe and Sudoku, so I feel comfortable in dealing with it. However, I do realize the amount of time and testing I'll need to get that done. I have in mind a way of solving it -- but it seems too much like a brute force to me. I'm still on the lookout for more elegant solutions. With how much I've done these sorts of check problems before, I feel a little bored and scared -- I know how much fine detail work needs to be put in and how easy it can be to get frustrated and lost with the problem. 

For Day 5, it seems a lot more manageable after learning about keys within sorted(). The problem has a set of "rules"; basically just a comparison between two integers about which one should go before in a list. It has a set of "updates", which is just that list of integers. The issue was that I didn't have a way to neatly compare rules to integers and then see if they're in the right order. If there was a way to sort the updates based on the rules and then compare to the original update, that would be great -- except the only way that I could think of was to have a bunch of loops and if-statements (not elegant!)

After looking at sorted() documentation, I found the functools' cmp_to_key function, where I can define my very own comparison for sorting. After messing around with it, I feel a lot more confident with how to work with sorted() to solve part 1 of Day 5. 

Overall, after working through the problems, I have a much better understanding of the kinds of efforts I will need to put in, and what I should focus on completing.

My next work is to get some code down and start working through the problems, now that I've got a sense of what they're like!
