---
layout: post
title: Day 3, Parts 1 & 2
---
Solving Advent of Code Day 3

# Preparation:

Honestly, confidence is currently at an all-time low going into Day 3. After seeing the frustration I felt during Day 2, I know that something needs to change in my problem-solving process. My goal is to approach my coding process much slower -- check what my lines do as I write them instead of accidentally ending up down a rabbit hole path of errors. I'm hopeful to see if my process can be better for these sets of problems, especially since I plan on using a new module I haven't used before.

# Debrief:

View my code for Day 3 [here](https://github.com/maxzw2/maxzw2.github.io/blob/b87c52776f0a2a8770ee2818d80d8c7f24dfd10b/files/Day_3_Advent_of_Code_2024.ipynb)

Day 3 Part 1 asks to find all statements in the exact format: "mul(X,Y)", where X and Y are 1-3 digit integers. Once these are found, you should multiply X and Y together and find the total sum. The input is otherwise full of clutter that you have to comb through. However, this clutter is utilized in Part 2, where now you have to confirm if a mul(X,Y) statement is valid/active before multiplying and adding it to the total. By default they are valid, but a "don't()" statement will invalidate any succeding mul(X,Y) statements, while a "do()" statement reactivates them. 

I successfully implemented regular expressions for Part 1, with only a few hiccups in the syntax the module requires. I found out about it at first by looking through modules or other functions that can find patterns -- I found that they're referred to as regular expressions and then the built-in Python module associated with them.

My solution for Part 1 using the re module was relatively simple, following a similar pattern for Part 1's for other days as well. I created my pattern by scrupulously examining the documentation. For example, I learned more about how it treats its special syntax -- it uses backslashes to define most of the useful stuff for me, like defining intended parentheses and decimal digits from 0-9. I was also able to code for 1-3 digit lengths with curly braces. I learned that I should define my pattern using "r" as a prefix to prevent backslash interference. 

I knew I wanted to grab all of the X's and Y's. Based on my pattern, I will be collecting only the digit numbers specified by "\d{1-3}". I found the findall() method that takes in my pattern and input and returns all of those values as tuples. From that, I could multiply those values together through a loop. 

Part 2 was where I saw my active checking pay off. After looking through my input, I figured that, by dividing my input into segments by "do()", all of them would either stay valid or have "don't()" as an invalid second half. I knew that I could focus on finding only the valid statements through using split(), but I initially tried splitting line by line. For all of my problems until this one, I was using readlines() to process my input since that was the most appropriate for them. Because I tested as I went, I knew that I was fudging the validity because the previous line didn't pass its validity to the next when iterating line by line. I was able to catch this slip-up early because I knew the properties thoroughly and checked as I went along. 

I successfully isolated the valid segments and yielded the correct answers for Day 3. I realized the importance of taking time to make sure your code is running how you want it. For example, I accidentally used a for loop when I switched over to read(), which converts the file into a string rather than a list that I was used to, and I was able to catch that I was iterating by a character in a string, not a list. However, I think I would have caught onto the split() property faster if I intentionally first wrote test cases, which I will go over more in depth in my next blog post.

I feel a lot better about tackling more problems, although I may not have enough time to complete the other 2 Days for Advent of Code. I found more about my habits with coding (accidentally skipping over impactful syntax details, staying rigid in trying to make one solution work) and what comes naturally to me in my patterns, like grouping tasks together. Overall, I enjoyed taking on this challenge of doing Advent of Code independently, especially since I was able to find information about regular expressions, as well as stumble on functools cmp_to_key for special sorting cases. I found that sort of "treasure hunting" within Python both difficult to comb through documentation while rewarding when you realize what you can do with all of these materials.

## Next Steps:

Since I am cutting myself short on the number of problems that I do, my next blog post will be the grand document for how I've been trying to test my code and make sure it covers cases and how it's grown and changed over these problems.
